ROLL A RANDOM BACKGROUND

CHARACTER CLASSES

DEATHBRINGER
Requirement: +1 STR
Hit dice: d10 (after 20hp + roll at disadvantage)
Armor & Weapons Any & all
To start: doublet
Special Abilities:
 Deathbringer. Spend one DD to make an extra attack.
 Ferocity. Gain an additional attack at 5th level

GRIMSCRIBE
Requirement: +1 INT or better
Hit Dice: d6 (after 15hp+ roll at disadvantage)
Armor & weapons: Clothes & dagger, staff, light crossbow, cannot wear armor
To start: 4 cantrips, two 1st level spells, journal, tattoo needles, ink, dagger.
Special Abilities:
 Cast Spells. No spell slots. Roll to cast, DC 10. One a roll of Natural 1 gain +1 Corruption and roll on the Miscast Table.
 Gain spells by finding scrolls grimoires, or by having a friendly higher-level wizard teach them to you. You are a living grimoire and must tattoo all spells on your skin

PLAGUE DOCTOR
Requirement: Minimum +1 INT & +1 WIS
Hit dice: d6 (after 15, roll at disadvantage)
Armor & Weapons: Light armor and meat cleaver and crossbow
To start: Leather coat, medical kit, chemistry kit, meat cleaver, very suspicious diploma.
Special Abilities:
 Cure Wounds. Restore d8hp once per day, per patient.
 Cure Poison & Disease. At will. DC 15.
 Create Potions: create d4 random potions per day. These chemicals are highly unstable and only
last 24 hours.
D8
1 Acid Spray
D10 range within throwing distance.
2 Bomb
D10 damage within throwing distance
3 Hallucinations Save v. CON 15 or suffer demonic visions for d4 rounds.
4 Healing
Heal d8hp.
5 Poison Cloud
D12 damage
6 Rage
Drinker gains +2 STR but suffers a -2 DEF
7 Sleep
Save vs. CON or fall asleep
8 Your choice
Any one.

SCOUNDREL
Requirement: +1 DEX or better
Hit Dice: d8 (after 15hp+ roll at disadvantage)
Armor & weapons: Light & any
To start: thieves’ tools, 50’ rope, leather jack (1 armor). Club or dagger.
Special Abilities:
 Backstab. Score an extra damage die on any surprise attack.
 Roguish Talents. If properly equipped, roll with Advantage on tests related to stealth, hiding,
listening, eavesdropping, lockpicking, finding & disarming traps, climbing, disguise, picking
pockets, etc.

WITCH HUNTER
Requirement: +1 WIS or better
Hit dice: d8 (after 16+hp roll at disadvantage)
Armor & Weapons: Light and any
To start: leather coat, club, crossbow, holy symbol, 6 torches
Special Abilities
 Protection from Evil. Once per day.
 Turn the Undead. At will. Test WIS against the target’s DEF. If the target fails, they flee at the
sight of the Witch Hunter’s holy symbol.
NAME YOUR CHARACTER
Here are some tricks for choosing a cool name:
 One syllable first name, two syllable last name. Ex: Hans Hurtzman, Britt Welkin
 Two syllable first name, one syllable last name Ex: Degger Rykes, Malice Frost
 Change the spelling of a common name. Ex: Edward to Eddard, Jennifer to Yennefer,
 Roll on the following chart:





DEATHBRINGER DICE

THIS IS HOW WE ROLL
Deathbringer Dice replace class features and may be used to improve rolls, cause/block damage.
Advantage & disadvantage for cover, low visibility, having the proper tools, etc.
Natural 20 means +d12 damage and you lower the opponent’s DEF by 1.
Natural 1 is a critical failure. Quiver is empty, you are disarmed, or Critical Miscast.

Replace class features, Skills, Feats & Inspiration with Deathbringer Dice. Begin each session with DD
equal to your level.
A player can “spend” DDs to:
(1) Add d6 to any d20 roll.
(2) Inflict an additional d6 damage on a successful hit.
(3) Absorb d6 damage.
You may use multiple DD at the same time.
DD cannot be used to alter a Nat 1 or used for initiative rolls. They are not replenished with rest but
respawn at the start of a session.

Store up to 10 DD on your sheet in these slots:



GAINING DEATHBRINGER DICE
GM may award additional Deathbringer Dice for good roleplaying, clever thinking, or for enhancing
the game for everyone at the table.

Players can use Deathbringer Dice to customize their characters or make them more versatile. Want
to be an expert archer? Use Deathbringer Dice when you shoot your bow. Want to be a martial arts
master? Use Deathbringer Dice to increase hand-to-hand combat. Need to take out that guard in one
shot? Use Deathbringer Dice to cause extra damage.
Pro Tip: make Deathbringer Dice a different, uniform color so they don’t become confused with the
other 6-sided dice at your table.




CRITICAL SUCCESS (NAT. 20)

A roll of Natural 20 is a critical success.
In combat, a Critical Success means +d12 extra damage.
A natural 20 on a spellcasting check means the spell ranges and effects are doubled.





CRITICAL FAILURE (NAT 1)

A roll of Natural 1 is a Critical failure.
A critical failure in combat or spellcasting means the player rolls the d20 again. This time, high is
bad, and the GM decides on an appropriate complication based on the circumstances. A Natural 1
on a spellcasting roll means a Critical miscast (see Spells):




d20
1-10

11-19

20

Melee Weapon
Disarmed. Your weapon flies d10 feet in
a random direction.
Weapon becomes lodged in a beam,
table, or ribcage and cannot be dislodged
until after the combat is over.
Your weapon shatters.

Missile Weapon
You run out of arrows/bolts.

Bow string or firing mechanism breaks and
may not be used again until repaired (d10
minutes).
Your bow is damaged beyond repair.

WEAPONS
D2:
D4:
D6:
D8:
D10:

Fist, kick, headbutt
Bone, club, dagger, improvised weapon
Mace, short bow, spear, staff
Battle Ax, long bow, rapier, sword, warhammer
Crossbow, two-handed sword

Free
0-5gp
5-25
10-40
25-50

ARMOR

+1 DEF
+2 DEF
+3 DEF
+4 DEF

Light
Medium
Heavy

Doublet, helm, leather jacket
Gambeson, scale, studded leather, chainmail bikini
Brigandine, Full chain
Full field plate (low visibility: -1 to hit)

10gp
50-75
100-200
1000+

KILL SHOTS
1-5:
6-10:
11-15:
15-19:
20:

Agonizing death. Your attack inflicts grim wounds to vital organs. Victim dies in d4
rounds.
Clean Kill. Your decisive, devastating attack drops your opponent with quiet simplicity.
Brutal Doom. You overkill your target with force, crushing bone, spraying blood—a real
mess.
Splatter & gore. Your attack renders the victim unrecognizable, smashed to a pulp or
hewn in two.
Deathbringer. So powerful is your kill, a nearby enemy is also hit. Enemies who view such
a kill are terrified and intimidated.




COMBAT

Rounds are 6 seconds. Group initiative every round: d6, highest roll wins. Ties= simultaneous
attack.
Players take turns clockwise from the GM.
Everyone must declare actions and Magic Users must declare their spells before initiative is
rolled. If the Magic User loses initiative and is successfully attacked, the spell fails.
PCs can move up to 20 feet and attack in one round.
No bonus actions.
Stunts: maneuvers such as pushing, disarming, tripping, blinding, etc. The GM rules whether the
stunt is possible and if the player has advantage, disadvantage, or makes a clean roll. If the roll
succeeds, the stunt is successful.
0 HP is unconscious. Negative HP=DEAD.

CIRCUMSTANCES
Advantage
 Attacker surprises their opponent.
 Attacker strikes from behind.
 Attacker has the higher ground.
 Attacker spends a round aiming their bow.
 Attackers outnumber the defender 3-1.

Disadvantage
 Defender has partial cover.
 The ground is slick or icy.
 Defender has the higher ground.
 The area is foggy or crowded.
 Firing from a moving vehicle.

MOVEMENT & RANGES

Forget feet and yards. Deathbringer uses three simple, abstract units of distance: Melee, Ranged, and
Out of Range.







MELEE means within a few steps—
about the size of a wrestling ring.
Anyone in Melee range can move and
hit anyone else in Melee range.
RANGED means within missile or
spell distance. It might be 30 feet or
100 feet—it’s abstract and flexible.
OUT OF RANGE means you are
within earshot but cannot see what is
going on. You know the combat is
happening but cannot interfere.

In one combat round, you can:
 Move from Out of Range to Ranged and attack with a bow or spell.
 Move from Ranged to Melee and attack with a weapon.
 Move anywhere in Melee and attack anything else in Melee.
 Move two zones. For example, move from Out of Range to Melee.
If a character is beyond Out of Range, they are unaware the combat is happening and may not
interfere.
INJURY & DEATH

At exactly zero HP a character is knocked unconscious. Players rolls the d6.
5-6 Lucky: awaken in d4 rounds with 1hp and a cool scar.
3-4 Concussed: awaken in d4 rounds with 1hp, but you receive a -2 penalty to all rolls until you
rest for d4 days.
1-2 Mangled: lose a finger, limb, or eye—GM decides.
At negative HP a character is DEAD.
HORDES




If a PC is surrounded by four or more attackers, roll one attack, adding an additional +1 for each
attacker over 1. Ex: 4 attackers= +3
On a successful hit the PC suffers regular damage +1 extra damage for each attacker over one. Ex:
4 attackers = +3 damage.

MASS COMBAT

In the event of a mass battle or castle siege, the GM should describe the battle: arrows darkening the
skies and raining down on shields, the ring of clashing steel, the mud, blood, and screams. Then have
the PCs make a Saving Throw to see how much damage they take in this initial clash:
 Battlefield: test DEX 10 test or lose ½ of hit points. Success means d6 damage in minor scrapes
and bruises.



In a siege against a castle or other fortification: test DEX 15 to avoid losing ½ HP. Success
means d6 damage in minor scrapes and bruises. When Defending a castle or other
fortification, test DEX 10.

After the initial crush of battle, telescope to the specific fight in which the characters are involved.
Roll that out like any normal combat. At the conclusion, roll on the following chart. Add +1 one if
the character won. Subtract -1 if they lost.
2d6
2-3

4-5
6-8
9
10-12

MASS COMBAT RESULTS
Massacre! The PCs are among the sole survivors of a brutal massacre. Their army is utterly
crushed and loses the battle.
Retreat! The PCs’ side suffers heavy casualties and retreats.
Inconclusive. Suffer heavy casualties before declaring the battle a draw.
Victory—barely. The enemy is routed but the players’ side suffers heavy casualties.
Victory! Players’ army wins a decisive victory, destroying the enemy’s forces.

CASTING SPELLS




Use any OSR or 5e spells you like—but the PCs must find them through exploration. Keep the
damage for those spells as is.
DC 10 to cast. Saving throws are 15.

All 5e and OSR spells are compatible with Deathbringer. Spellcasting is illegal and spellcasters are burned on
sight. As such they keep a low profile. Spellcasters who show off their powers in public will find themselves
quickly surrounded by an angry mob.

TO HELL WITH SPELL SLOTS!
You can learn unlimited spells—that’s the good news. The bad news is you must find them. You do this by:
 Exploring ruins and dungeons to recover ancient scrolls and grimoires.
 Exchanging spells with a friendly NPC or another wizard. Sometimes lower lever wizards apprentice
themselves to higher level ones.
Acquiring Spells
 Begin with the number of spells proscribed by your class.
 When you gain a spell, you must tattoo it on your skin. The more spells you know, the more easily
recognized you will be to witch-hunters. A freshly dead magic user’s skin is a valuable treasure!
 Just like in 5e or OSR, you cannot cast spells higher than your level will allow.
 You must roll to cast spells.

ROLL TO CAST
 The DC to cast is 10.
 Add your INT (or CHA if a sorcerer or warlock) score to casting rolls.
 On a natural 20, the damage or effect of the spell is doubled.
 On a natural 1, gain 1 Corruption and roll on the Critical Miscast Chart.

CRITICAL MISCAST
Caster gains +1 Corruption and…

1-10
11-15
16
17
18
19
20

Fizzle. Spell does not work. Ghostly laughter fills the room.
Backfire. Caster takes the damage or effect.
Disaster. All armor, both friend and foe, disintegrates.
Spell hits wrong target or summons a hostile monster.
Caster loses a level or ages d20 years.
Caster gains a random mutation.
Catastrophic. Caster explodes in a shower of gore.

SAVING THROWS




All Saving Throws vs magic are DC 15.
Add WIS to saving throws vs mind-control spells like charm or sleep.
Add DEX to saving throws vs explosive spells like fireball and lightning bolt.





GAMEMASTER SECTION
THE CORE RULE

Here is the real core rule designers keep from the general public, lest panic ensue: No matter what
variant you play—1st E, 5e, OSE—character “advancement” is largely illusory. As characters rise in
level and gain bonuses, the GM responds by raising the Difficulty Class of the challenges
progressively higher. No matter how powerful a character becomes, no matter what level they
achieve, no matter how high their bonuses, a twenty-sided die can only produce results between 1
and 20. If you strip away all the character ability score and skill bonuses, the game looks like this:
Roll
Result
15+
Success!
10-14
Maybe. Check with the GM.
1-9
Failure.
DC of 11 gives PCs a 50% chance of success. A DC of 16+ represents a significant challenge. In
combat, DCs over 15 should be rare; otherwise, the encounter may drag on interminably, with
neither side landing a blow. A DC of less than 10 is so easy the GM should ask—is this roll even
necessary? Failing an extremely low skill check can humiliate the player and make their character
seem incompetent.

The entire game then, hinges on a GM using their best judgement to set a DC within the 10-16 range.
If the DC is too high, players become frustrated. If the DC is too low, the game is not challenging.
Once a GM understands this, they can make decisions with greater confidence.

WHEN TO ROLL & WHEN NOT TO

Call for a roll when the outcome is a reasonable chance of failure (better than 50%) or when there is
some sort of time pressure on a character. If a thief is attempting to pick the lock of a chest in a
dungeon and wandering monsters might show up any minute, it requires a check. If the thief carries
the same chest back to the tavern and has unlimited time, no check is needed.
More important is when not to roll the dice. When a GM calls for a die roll, they must be open to the
possibility that the die will come up 1. If it’s critical to the plot for the PCs to find a secret door, allow
them to find it without a check. Also, too many checks create lazy players who think their character
sheet can overcome every problem. Here are some things we don’t roll the dice for:
 Perception & searching. Players should describe what they are searching and how they are
searching it. Example: “I search the library shelves. Do any of the books tilt back and trigger a
secret door?” If there is a secret door, let them find it.
 Insight. Psychologists, police detectives, and divorce attorneys will tell you there is no way to tell
if someone is lying—it’s not a real thing. If players want insight into an NPC, they must roleplay
with them.
 Most Social Encounters. Don’t allow players to skip role-playing by rolling the d20—and a
natural 20 does not mean a PC can convince a king to give up his crown. It means some
commoners made him crack a smile and he will remember them.
TIPS FOR MAKING COMBAT EXCITING
KEEP IT MOVING
Ever notice most RPGs slow down when the action starts? Here are some tips for keeping it moving:
 Never stop to look up rules—ever. If characters do something not covered by the rules, trust your instincts
and go with the flow. Assign a DC and move on.
 Real combat is fast and real soldiers have to make split-second decisions. Don’t allow players to take too
long to decide what they want to do. Say, “What does Malleus want to do? You have five seconds.
Five…four….three…”.
 Have the players all roll their attack dice at the same time, then look at the results and narrate what
happened.
AVOID GAME LANGUAGE
Use natural language, not technical jargon. Describe the results of every die roll. Do not say, “The goblin
missed.” Instead say, “Splinters fly and your arm goes numb as the goblin batters at your shield!” Do not say,
“You kill the bandit.” Instead say, “Your blow slices through the bandit’s carotid artery, spraying you with
blood and dropping him to the ground in a gurgling heap.”
You can also off-load descriptions on the players. Have them describe what their miss or critical hit looks like!

ROLL OUT IN THE OPEN
Nothing is more terrifying than when a GM makes their rolls out in the open. No hiding. No fudging. No
pulling punches. If a natural 20 comes up and a character is killed on the first shot—well, that’s life. It
happens—even to heroes.
When players know the GM doesn’t pull punches, they are more cautious about entering combat in the first
place. They start thinking about using the environment to give them the advantage and will seek to take the

enemy by surprise. Even if no characters die, your game will feel more dangerous, because the players know
their favorite character is one natural 20 away from a dirt nap.
So, roll out in the open and let your players know combat is potentially fatal.

TIMER DICE
The moment someone throws the first punch, the GM tosses a d4, in public view. The resulting number is the
number of rounds before something terrible happens. For example:
 reinforcements arrive
 a torch goes out
 the ceiling collapses
 the ice cracks and the PCs fall through
 the enemy slits the prisoner’s throat
 the monster regenerates to full HP
The GM can let players know the stakes—or just give an evil laugh and say the consequences will be serious.
Timers are one of the most effective ways to build tension.

IMPORTING & CONVERTING MONSTERS

 Import any monsters stat from 5e/OSR games.
 Monsters have pure HD (no CON bonuses).
Monsters from 5E and all OSR retro clones are compatible with Deathbringer. If you play 5e, simply
ignore HP due to Con bonuses; this will reduce monster HP by about 1/3. OSR stat blocks do not
need to be changed. Other tips:
 Monsters should be rare and mysterious. Deathbringer is strongly influenced by the writings of
Robert Howard, Fritz Leiber, and Karl Edward Wagner. In their stories, monsters exist but are
rare. If a scenario is about a werewolf terrorizing a village, build the scenario around that one
werewolf. One werewolf, well done, is more frightening than pack of werewolves.
 Humans are the most common monster. The easiest way to create a grimdark atmosphere is to
make most of the enemies human: brigands, raiders, cannibals, cultists, cavemen, rival witch
hunters, mutants, mad scientists, and so on.
 Re-skin old tropes. Players are frightened by what they don’t know. Avoid the familiar.
Orcs, hobgoblins, and ogres are tired. Keep the stat blocks but change their appearance and call
them something else. Reskinning kobolds as “creepers” or an ogre as “The Man-Skinner” will
make them seem frightening again.
 Dungeons should be thematic, not monster zoos. A depraved noble’s dungeon might contain
depraved servants, cultists, and torture devices, but not animated skeletons or giant spiders. Think
about the location. Consider its purpose. Why was it built? For whom? Then place the monsters
that would logically live there.
MAGIC ITEMS
Deathbringer is a “low-magic” world. Magic items are rare and one-of-a-kind—no +1 daggers or +2
rings of protection. Potions are the most common type of “magic,” created through chemistry, not
sorcery.

POTIONS & DRUGS
Potions are typically found in small glass vials and contain a single dose. Potions are rare and
unstable—after just 24 hours, the ingredients begin to separate, and the potion loses its effectiveness.
Common potions & drugs include:
Acid Spray
Bomb
Hallucinations
Healing
Moonsnow
Poison Cloud
Poison
Rage
Sleep
Weirdweed

D10 range within throwing distance.
D10 damage within throwing distance
Save v. CON 15 or suffer demonic visions for d4 rounds.
Heal d8hp.
A powder made from refined moonstone. Spellcasters gain +2 to cast for 30
minutes, but must Save DC 5 or become hopelessly addicted.
D12 damage
Coat a weapon. Save DC 15 or suffer d6hp damage.
Drinker gains +2 STR but suffers a -2 DEF
Save vs. CON or fall asleep
Smoked by spellcasters in ornate pipes or cigarette holders. Smells like
wintergreen. Spellcasters gain +1 to cast for an hour but must Save DC 3 or
become addicted. Side effects include lethargy and cancer.

ADDICTION
Addicted characters need to consume 5-10gp of their drug of choice every day. How, when, and if a
character can overcome addiction is up to the GM. Asylums, surgery, treatment facilities, mystical cures
are all options, but should be expensive (100+gp) and meet with only a 50% rate of success, at best.

RARE & UNIQUE MAGIC ITEMS
+1 Sword of Evisceration
On a natural 20, this razor-sharp blade inflicts d20 bonus damage. On a natural 1, it inflicts damage
on the nearest ally.
Prayer Beads of Saint Umbrage
These golf-ball sized prayer beads are made from the bones and hair of a martyred saint. They
inflict d6 damage and can be used to strangle opponents. On an attack roll of natural 1, the strands
of hair break and the beads scatter and can never be repaired. Only Witch Hunters may use these.
Shield of Screaming
This ornate shield has a face carved in the center and grants +2 additional points of DEF. When
combat begins, the face starts screaming profanities at opponents like, Come get us, you bastards!

You’ll never able to take down THIS warrior!
Arcane Pistol

This wand of magic missiles is shaped like a gun and inflicts d6 damage on any target, no saving
throw. On a natural 1 it explodes, taking d4 of the caster’s fingers with it.
Severine’s Boots
Stylish ankle-high women’s boots made from the softest baby unicorn skin. Although the heels are
high, they are incredibly comfortable, and the wearer will never trip while using them. They will
get stuck in mud, however, and only fit the smallest of female feet.
Monster Lure
This grease is often sold by duplicitous witches. Rubbing it on the skin grants +1 DEF but its scent
attracts monsters within 500 feet.
Telescopic Eye
This artificial eye extends like a telescope and can triple the distance the user can see when
outdoors.
MOONSTONE

Moonstone is a rare element that arrives in meteors from the stars. It is the essence of chaos, and
highly sought-after by cultists and spellcasters. Moonstone is black, with flecks of green, and the
primary ingredient in moonsnow, poisons, black powder, sorcerous rituals, and magic weapons.
Direct contact between pure moonstone and the skin can lead to mutation. Raw moonstone can sell
for as much as 1gp per ounce.

APPENDIXES
EQUIPMENT
All prices are given in gold pieces (gp), except where noted in silver (s).
 10 copper (c) = 1 silver
 10 silver (s) = 1 gold (gp)
Prices and availability may vary by region and circumstances. If an area is isolated or afflicted with drought,
famine, plague, war, etc., PCs can expect to pay up to double these prices.

WEAPONS
Item

Cost

Damage

Item

Cost

Damage

Axe, battle

20

d6

Mace

10

d6

Axe, hand

5

d4

Meat Cleaver
Breaks on a natural 1

3

d6

Blunderbuss*

500

d8

Pistol*

1000

d10

Brass Knuckles

5

d4

Pole Arm

10

d6

Requires two hands.
Bow, Recurve

30

d6

Rapier

20

d6

Club

3

d6

Sling & bullets

2

d4

Crossbow*

50

d8

Sword

20

d6

Crossbow, mini
Takes 2 rounds to
reload.

100

d4

Sword, Great
Requires two hands.

40

d8

Dagger/Knife

10

d4

Spear

10

d6

Flail

20

d6

Unarmed

-

2

Improvised*

-

d4

Warhammer

20

d6

*Takes 2 rounds to reload.

*Firearms ignore all armor DEF but take 6 rounds to load and are unreliable. An attack roll of natural 1 is a misfire; roll the
d20 again. On a roll of 1-19 nothing happens, and the gun must be reloaded. On a natural 20 the firearm explodes and the
user loses d4 fingers.

EQUIPMENT
Gear

Cost

Gear

Cost

Gear

Cost

Arrows, quiver of 20

2

Disguise Kit

25

Rations, 1 week

5

Backpack

2

Flask or bottle

1

Rope (50’)

2

Bedroll

1

Grappling Hook

2

Sack

2

Bolts, case of 20

2

Hammer (small)

1

Saddlebags

5

Book (blank)

25

Holy symbol (fine)

5

Shovel

2

Boots (good)

2

Iron spikes (6)

2

Spyglass

99

Bullets, Sling (10)

1

Lantern

5

Stakes (3) & mallet

5

Candle (10)

1sp

Manacles

20

Tent, canvas

5

Chain

1

Medical Tools

50

Thieves’ Lockpicks

35

Chemistry Kit

100

Mirror, hand

5

Tinder box

3

Cloak, Wool

1

Moonsnow (1 dose)

10+

Tome

50

Cloak, Fine

10

Musical Instrument

1-10+

Torches (6)

1

Clothing, common

2

Oil (1 pint)

1sp

Vial, glass

2

Clothing, fine

15

Perfume

5+

Waterskin

1

Cookware

1

Pick

2

Wine, pint

1

Crowbar

2

Pole (6’, wooden)

2

Wyrdweed (d4 doses)

4

SERVICES
The following reflect average prices. During famine, wars, or a busy season, prices may increase.
Food & Lodging

Cost

Hirelings

Cost

Transport

Cost

Ale or wine

1s

Barber

5sp

Cart

5

Meal

2s

Guide

1

Coach

10

Expensive Meal

5s

Henchman

2-5

River Boat

2

Feed & stable horse

5s

Physician

10+

Wagon

5

Inn, Common Rom

5s

Scribe*

5+

Riding Horse

100+

Inn, Private Room

2

Specialist*

10+

War Horse

500+

1 week lodging & meals

20

Hospice

1-2s

*Not always available
outside of cities.

D20 KILL SHOTS
Need Help Narrating Death & Carnage? Use these.
d20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

BLADES
You chop off your opponent’s hand at the wrist. They drop to their knees, clutching the mangled
stump, and will die of blood loss in d4 rounds.
You drive your blade into the meaty part of your opponent’s leg. As you yank it out, you sever an
artery, spraying blood over a wide area. They scream for d4 rounds before dying.
You slide your blade between your opponent’s ribs and out their back. They fall to their knees and
stare blankly for d4 rounds before keeling over.
You rupture your opponent’s abdominal cavity. They stand shocked for a moment, attempting to hold
in their intestines inside. Then they collapse, dying in d4 rounds.
You hack your opponent’s skull, the blade lodging itself in their brain. They stagger forward a few
steps before collapsing.
You slide your blade under the arm push it through until it emerges out the opposite shoulder.
You drive your blade through the ribs and out your opponent’s back.
Your blow hacks through the arm, severing it completely before lodging in the rib cage. Death from
shock and blood loss is nearly instantaneous.
You slice open your opponent’s belly, unleashing the contents onto the floor.

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

d20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

d20
1

You sever the carotid artery, unleashing an arterial spray.
You shatter your opponent’s skull and bury your blade in their forehead, unleashing gouts of blood
and brain fluid.
Your blow drives your opponent’s jaw into their brain, killing them.
Your blow removes the top of your opponent’s skull, exposing their brain.
You bury your blade in your opponent’s side, slicing through several organs and lodging in their
spine.
You hack your opponent’s neck, unleashing a fountain of blood.
Your blade cleaves through your opponent’s collar bone and into their rib cage, exposing bone and
internal organs and unleashing a geyser of blood.
You plunge your weapon into your opponent’s eye and into their brain.
You cleave your opponent’s skull, splattering you with blood and brain matter.
You hack through your opponent’s torso and they fall in two separate pieces.
Your opponent’s surprised head flies d10 feet in a random direction before bouncing to a stop.

ARROWS & SHARP PROJECTILES
Your shot lodges in the pelvis. After d4 rounds of agony, your opponent dies from blood loss.
Your shot lands in the meat of the leg, severing the femoral artery and spraying the area with blood.
After a round of kicking and screaming, your target dies.
Your shot enters the bicep and then lodges in the chest. They die after d4 rounds of screaming.
Your shot enters the shoulder and exits out the neck. Target gurgles and dies after d4 rounds.
Your shot enters under the armpit and emerges out the neck. They stagger forward a few steps before
collapsing on their face.
Your shot penetrates the belly and lodges in the spine. Your opponent groans for d4 rounds before
succumbing to blood loss.
Your shot enters the diaphragm, tearing through flesh and bone. Your target falls to the ground,
vomiting blood, then turns still.
Your shot punctures your opponent’s lung. They vomit blood before collapsing.
Your shot enters the solar plexus, pierces the heart, and emerges out the back.
Your blow penetrates your opponent’s armor, passes through the sternal plate, and lodges in the
heart.
Your shot lands between the ribs and pierces the heart.
Your shot enters the throat and exits the back of the neck. Your opponent drops to their knees,
gurgling, before collapsing.
Your shot enters the neck, severing the carotid artery and sending a spray of blood into the air. Death
is nearly instantaneous.
Your shot enters the bottom of your target’s jaw, impales the brains, and emerges out the back of
their skull.
Your shot enters your target’s open mouth and lodges in the brain.
You shot enters one side of the skull and emerges out the other.
Your shot enters though the left eye and emerges out the back of the skull.
Your shot enters the right eye and into the brain.
Your shot enters the head between your opponent’s eyes and impales the brain.
Your shot passes right through the body—killing the target instantly—and continues onward to
strike the target behind them.
BLUNT WEAPONS & HANDS
Your blow slams into your opponent’s side, cracking their vertebrae, and rupturing several internal
organs. Death from shock and internal injuries in d4 rounds.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Your blow shatters the shoulder and drives shattered bone through the rib cage. You opponent dies of
internal bleeding after d4 rounds.
You crack several ribs, driving them into internal organs and causing massive hemorrhaging. Death in
d4 rounds.
You smash the ribs repeatedly, rupturing several internal organs. Your opponent vomits blood and
keels over, dying in d4 rounds.
Your blow shatters your opponent’s sternum. By chance, a shard of bone impales the heart. They
stagger forward a few feet before collapsing on their face.
Your blow shatters the ribs. By chance one of them punctures a lung, causing your opponent to vomit
blood before dying from shock and blood loss.
You collapse your opponent’s rib cage, rupturing several internal organs and causing them to vomit
gouts of blood before collapsing dead.
You shatter your opponent’s collarbone. Part of the bone emerges out the throat, severing a major
artery and killing them almost instantly.
Your blow lands on the skull, shattering several vertebrae and causing a sharp of bone to emerge out
the neck. By chance, this bone severs the carotid artery. Your opponent slums to the floor gurgling,
then dies.
You snap your opponent’s neck with an audible crack, killing them instantly.
Your blow lands so hard it snaps your opponent’s neck and twists the head nearly all the way around.
Your blow lands between your target’s eyes and they drop to their knees, staring stupidly. Suddenly, a
fountain of blood erupts from their nose, and they slump over dead.
You shatter your opponent’s jaw, driving it upward into their brain.
You smash your opponent’s nose bridge, driving a splinter of bone into the brain.
You shatter the eye socket, sending a shard of bone into the brain, killing them.
You bludgeon your target’s face repeatedly, turning it into a pulpy mess of blood and brain matter.
You cave in your opponent’s skull. They drop to their knees, the nose unleashes gouts of blood, and
they keel over dead.
You shatter your opponent’s skull, splattering you with blood and brain matter.
You cave in the side of your opponent’s head, crushing the brain to pulp and splattering you with
blood.
You cave in your target’s skull, killing them instantly.

THIS IS THE END
What about fighting on horseback? Or while mounted on a griffon? Or ship-to-ship combat?

We dunno. That sort of stuff doesn’t come up much in our games, so we’re not going to touch it.
Instead, we’ve given you all the tools you need to answer the question yourself. Assign a target
number and move on. Make it up. Nobody is watching. There are no game police to say you did it
wrong. Share your ideas on the DungeonCraft Discord.
May all your rolls be 20s!

