
7. PERSONALITY 

CHARACTER CREATION

**Profession**  is your character’s current occupation.
**Background** is what the character did for the 8-10 years prior to becoming an adventurer.
**Expertise** are the tasks in which your character is highly skilled. Do not think of expertise as a list of
individual skills so much as a skill stack. New characters start with d4 Expertise.

SPECIAL ABILITIES

Special abilities are powers only possessed by specific Professions. Only Wizards may cast spells. Only
Clerics can say prayers.

PROFESSIONS
BOUNTY HUNTER
Bounty Hunters hunt criminals and bring them to justice in exchange for money. They are
indefatigable, resourceful, and tough.
PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 CON to start
Weapons & Armor Permitted: all hand weapons, all ranged weapons, light armor, shield
Attack Damage: club (d6), crossbow (d8) or d4 (unarmed)
Roll or choose:
D8
BACKGROUND
1
Bailiff
You beat a criminal to a pulp. How were you supposed to know he
was the burgomeister’s nephew?
2
Criminal
You escaped prison and created a new identity for yourself.
Another bounty hunter hunts you.
3
Executioner
Change in administration put you out of work.
4
Ex-watchman You were the only honest copper in a crooked town. You traded in
your badge for a clean conscience.
5
Hunter
You used to kill animals for their fur. Now you hunt people in
order to better provide for your d6 starving family members.
6
Jailer
You observed catching criminals is more lucrative that guarding
them.
7
Ranger
You returned home from the war to find your family dead. You are
hunting the rat bastards that did it.
8
Scout
You served in the military until peace broke out.
EQUIPMENT
Every Bounty Hunter starts with a set of manacles, a net, a wanted poster for a criminal
worth d4x10gp, and a flee-bitten horse on its last legs (at the start of each session, toss a d6.
On a 1 it dies). Choose A or B:
A. Leather coat (+1 DEF), shield (+1 DEF), club, light crossbow, dagger, widebrimmed hat, tinderbox & d6 small cigars, d6gp.
B. Greasy doublet (+1 DEF), club, light crossbow, throwing knife, wool cloak with
hood, flask of whiskey, d6gp.

EXPERTISE
Searching, tracking, riding horses, survival, melee weapons, ranged weapons.
SPECIAL ABILITIES
Knockout blow: when using a club, you KO an opponent of lower Level on a natural 20.
Tie Knots: if you tie someone up, they get disadvantage to escape. When tied up or shackled
you get advantage to escape!
Sharpshooter: do an additional d6hp damage when attacking with a crossbow
Bonus Attacks (Level 4): you are able to attack twice in lieu of moving.
ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d6+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).
You gain the talent Bonus Attack at Level 4.

CLERIC
Clerics are members of a religious order who seek out martyrdom in the service of their
faith. Clerics take strict vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience. The must give away all
their excess wealth, remain celibate, and obey orders from superiors. In exchange for their
obedience, they gain the ability to cast prayers. To cast a prayer, a Cleric must be in a state of
grace (+1 or better on the Morality tracker).
Clerics may use medium and melee weapons. They do not use ranged weapons, as they
perceive them to be cowardly.
PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 WIS and +1 Morality
Weapons & Armor Permitted: hammer, mace, or sword, medium armor, shield
Attack Damage: d8 (hammer or mace) or d4 (unarmed)
Roll or choose:
D6
BACKGROUND
1
Scab eater

You cared for lepers, licking away the puss from their
wounds and eating their scabs.

2

Flagellant

3

Initiate

4

Penitent

5

Visionary

6

Witch-hunter

You travelled from town to town, warning sinners to
repent, for the end times are near!
You were born into a wealthy family but gave up that life
for your faith.
When you were young, you engaged in all manner of vice
and debauchery, but you discovered the True Faith and
seek to lead others to redemption.
While praying, an angel appeared and said you were
destined for holy martyrdom.
Witches killed your beloved. You must hunt them down
and make them pay!

EQUIPMENT
Every Cleric starts with religious vestments, a holy symbol, a flask of holy water, a scourge
for self-flagellation, and a holy tome. The tome is bound in brass and contains a list of
prayers and doubles as both a shield (+1 DEF) and a weapon (d6 damage). Choose A or B:
A. Padded vestments (+2 DEF), hammer, cloak with hood, 6 torches, & tinderbox, vial
of saint’s tears (heals d4hp), 2d6gp.
B. Leather armor (+2 DEF), mace, giant prayer beads (can attack all within 5’ for d6)
cloak with hood, lantern and oil, d6 holy wafers (heal 1hp each), 2d6gp.
ASPIRATIONS OF SAINTHOOD
For their powers to work, Clerics must have at least +1 on the Morality Tracker. If a Cleric
achieves higher than +3 Morality they are considered Saintly and starting at Level 5 will
automatically attract d4 disciples who will serve as henchmen.
If a Cleric should fall to a negative number on the Morality tracker they are considered fallen
and are excommunicated. They may continue to gain Levels and Hit Points but can no longer
cast Prayers. This consequence is permanent and irreversible.
EXPERTISE
Saying prayers, reading and writing classical languages.
SPECIAL ABILITIES
Beginning at second level, a Cleric can cast a number of Prayers equal to their Level.
When a Cleric attempts to cast Prayers, they add their WIS bonus and Expertise.

If the Test succeeds the Prayer is answered and takes effect as described. If the attempt
succeeds with a natural 20, the Prayer’s effects are doubled.
If the Test fails, the Cleric may try again next round. If the attempt fails with a natural “1,”
the Cleric’s god becomes angry and they must roll on the Prayer Critical Failure table.
PRAYER
Bless
Circle of Protection
Cure Blindness

Cure disease
Cure wounds
Neutralize Poison
Sense Evil
Light
Protection from Evil
Purify
Speak in Tongues
Smite Evil
Turn Undead

EFFECT
Give a single weapon +1 “to hit” for that combat encounter.
No evil creature can enter the circle, which can fit two people. Lasts for WIS
+d4 hours.
Your saliva instantly cures anyone afflicted with temporary blindness. It may
cure a person suffering from permanent blindness on a WIS Test 20. You
cannot regrow an eye damaged from a Critical Wound.
Your touch cures the afflicted on a WIS Test 20.
Your touch restores d4 lost HP or stabilizes a critically wounded ally.
Your touch instantly cures the poisoned.
Sense if an evil presence is within 100 yards. Cannot detect whether a
specific person is evil. Lasts 10 minutes.
Holy symbol illuminates a 20’ radius for 1 hour.
All allies within near range get +1 DEF for one combat encounter.
Restores brackish water or rotten meat.
Allows the Cleric to understand any language and be understood by others.
Lasts 5 minutes.
Gain d6 bonus damage on your next attack.
Any undead flee from the sight of the Cleric’s holy symbol for this
encounter. At Level 5, undead of lower HD turn to dust.

ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d6+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).
At Level 5 and if you reach maximum on the Morality Tracker, you attract d4
disciples who function as henchmen.

DUELIST
Duelists are professional adventurers who travel from place to place, looking for reasons to
be offended. When someone gives offense, the duelist challenges them to a duel. When not
starting fights, duelists work as professional mercenaries.

STARTING PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 DEX
Weapons & Armor Permitted: all hand weapons, all ranged weapons, light armor, shield
Attack Damage: d8 (rapier), d10 (pistol) or d4 (unarmed)
Roll or choose:
D6 BACKGROUND
1
Expelled student

2

Bastard noble

3
4

Banished noble
Penniless noble

Your father is a merchant of means for paid a fortune to
send you to university. You accidentally(?) killed another
student in a duel.
Your father never acknowledged you but taught you how
to use a sword and gave you a bag of gold coins.
You fled a scandal and can never return home.
Your family has fallen into ruin. You have nothing but
your name.

EQUIPMENT
Every Duelist starts with a rapier, pistol, puffy shirt, plumed hat, immodestly tight breeches,
monogrammed leather gloves for slapping people who give offense, and a decent horse.
Choose one:
A: Leather coat (+1 DEF), dagger, thigh-high leather boots, 1 lucky coin, 2d6gp.
B: Fashionable doublet (+1 DEF), cloak with hood, book on dueling etiquette, d6gp.
DUELING ETIQUETTE
Duelists will only duel someone of equal or greater class/Level. Once a duel is arranged, the
only way to stop it is to negotiate a settlement or fight. The challenged choose the weapon—
typically a rapier or pistol. Rapier duels typically end at first blood but may be fought until
the offended party says satisfaction has been achieved. In a pistol duel the challenged fires
first and the challenger fires last. Shots are exchanged until the challenger states satisfaction
has been achieved. A duelist must initiate and resolve at least one duel before advancing to
the next Level.
EXPERTISE
Unarmed combat, Melee Weapons, Dueling pistol, dancing, gambling, riding horses,
seduction.
Dueling Pistol: d10 damage. Fires 1 shot per 10 combat rounds. Ignores all armor. Jams or
explodes on a natural 1 (50/50). When it explodes the user loses d4 fingers. Unjamming
requires a DEX check.

SPECIAL ABILITIES
Lucky: once per session, re-roll any die roll or make the GM re-roll any attack against you.
Main Gauche: you are skilled with a parrying dagger. It affords +1 DEF.
Sharpshooter: do an additional d6hp damage when attacking with a dueling pistol
Bonus Attack (4rd Level): you are able to attack twice in lieu of moving.
ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d6+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).
Bonus Attack at 4th level.

FIGHTER
Fighters are trained professional soldiers or mercenaries. Some fight for noble and holy
causes, others for money. Crusaders, knights, sell-swords, archers, and thugs are all fighters.
WEAPONS MASTER OR ARCHER
Choose a path:
Brute. Expertise in Melee Weapons. Begin with +1 STR.
Archer. Expertise in Ranged weapons. Begin with +1 DEX.
STARTING PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 STR or +1 DEX, +2HP
Weapons & Armor Permitted: all hand weapons, all ranged weapons, shield, & armor
Attack Damage: d8 (sword, ax, bow) or d4 (unarmed)
Roll or choose
D10 Background
1
Brutal Thug

2

Deserter

3

Desperate farmer

Nobles frequently employ tax-collectors and bodyguards.
You were one such servant until an indiscretion led to your
dismissal.
You were pressed into an army and fled after you
participated in a brutal massacre. The army is still after
you.
Locusts ate your crops. You had to become an adventurer
or starve. You have d6 starving family members to feed.

4

Discharged Soldier

5

Expelled Student

6

Grizzled Veteran

7

Lone survivor

8

Meat-shield

9

Outlaw

10

Unlucky Bourgeois

You served your Lord until peace broke out. Now you
wander as a mercenary.
You left University in a scandal. Now you’re the smartest
meat bag on the battlefield.
You served your time and thought you had hung up your
sword for good. But the swine flu took your livestock and
fever took your wife. Desperate to feed your d4 children,
you have no choice.
Your town or military unit was ambushed; you were the
lone survivor. You burn for revenge.
AKA “henchman” or “hireling”—you know—the
expendable guy adventurers hire to fight for them. When
the monsters attacked, you fled. Good thing too—you were
the only survivor of the party.
You were charged with a crime you didn’t (or did) commit.
You cannot return home under pain of death.
You are the child of a successful merchant but an unlucky
turn of events (business burned, accidentally killed
someone, etc) reduced you to desperate circumstances.

EQUIPMENT
Every Fighter starts with pair of sturdy boots, and a tattered wool cloak. Also, choose A
(Brute) or B (Archer):
A. Scale-mail shirt (+2 DEF), battered shield, sword, dagger, whetstone, flask of
oil, hip flask filled with whiskey, lucky dice, d6gp
B. Blood-spattered Gambeson (+1 DEF), bow, quiver with 20 arrows, extra
bowstrings, dagger, whetstone, flask of oil, greasy playing cards, d6gp.
EXPERTISE
Unarmed combat, either Melee or Ranged weapons, recruiting henchmen/hirelings, riding
horses, gambling, consuming alcohol.
SPECIAL ABILITIES
Fighters can employ one special fighting technique per round. The do not stack:
Cleave: when you drop an opponent, you can attack another opponent within 5 feet.
Shield Shall Be Shattered!: A fighter may sacrifice their shield to negate one successful attack.
The shield is immediately destroyed.

Shake It Off: pause after combat. Once a day, take a swig of whiskey, a few deep breaths, and
regain d4hp.
Bonus Attack/Mighty Blow: At Level 3, you are able to attack twice in lieu of moving OR do
an additional d6 damage on a single opponent.
Cool Moves: Before an attack, the player describes a dramatic move. Ex: disarming an
opponent, forcing an opponent backwards, tripping an opponent, knocking an opponent off a
bridge, etc. If the hit is successful, the player rolls their damage die, without adding
modifiers. On a roll of 3 or better, the move is successful. The move cannot be used to cause
extra damage.
ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d8+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).
You gain the talent Bonus Attack at Level 3.

PLAGUE DOCTOR
Plague are physician/alchemists capable of healing wounds and creating dangerous potions.
PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 INT to start
Weapons & Armor Permitted: leather coat, knives and cleavers, crossbow
Attack Damage: d6 (cleaver) or d4 (unarmed)
D8
1
2
3
4

BACKGROUND
Addicted apothecary
Barber-surgeon
Disgraced practitioner
Drug dealer

5
6

Expelled student
Leech collector

7

Mad Scientist

You don’t like the drugs but the drugs like you.
Patient sneezed and you accidentally nicked an artery.
You could have sworn the heart had two chambers.
One bad batch of product led to an OD and now the
authorities are hunting you.
Thrown out of University for cheating.
You used to walk into swamps and allow leeches to attack
themselves to your legs. The local physician took a shine to
you.
Cross-breeding your animal test-subjects led to an outbreak
of plague.

8

Piss prophet

You diagnosed disease by drinking your patients’ urine
before forging a diploma and upping your prices.

EQUIPMENT
Every Plague Doctor starts with a frightening leather beak mask, a wide-brimmed black hat,
a set of rusty medical tools, a potion-making kit, 2d6 glass bottles, and a diploma from a
dubious university. Choose either A or B
A. mule and buggy cart, unguent, jar containing d6 leaches, 2d6gp
B. a mangy, overladen horse, lantern and oil, jar containing d6 leeches 3d6gp
EXPERTISE

Read and write common and classical languages, diagnose and cure diseases, perform surgery,
stanch bleeding, stitch wounds, create potions.
SPECIAL ABILITIES
Create Potions: create d6 random potions per day. Each costs d6gp in components.
Diagnose/Cure Disease: if successful, the patient recovers in d4 days. If not, they die.
Stitch Wounds: restores d6hp. Can be done once per day, per patient.
Surgery: gain Advantage when attempting to stop the hemorrhaging of a patient reduced to
0hp.
Treat Wounds: wounded characters heal +2hp per day while under your supervision.
POTIONS
Potions are made from various plants, herbs, monster organs, and bodily fluids. Plague
doctors are assumed to be searching for components at all times and cannot always make the
potion they want. Potions are only stable for one day, after which they expire.
D10

POTION

EFFECT

1
2
3

Acid
Explosion
Hallucination

4

Healing

5

Juice

Ranged weapon. Causes d6 damage to Target.
Causes 2d6 damage to everyone in a 20’ Zone.
Target must save DR 10 or experience hallucinations for d4 rounds.
Target flees if possible and suffers -1 to all Attacks if forced to fight.
The salve, made from the powdered horns of endangered unicorns, heals
d6 HP.
Drinker must test DR 2. If successful, their muscles swell and neck veins
pop and they gain an extra attack for d6 rounds. On a roll of natural 1
their heart bursts and they are killed instantly.

6

Moonsnow

7
8

Poison
Yellow Spores

9
10

Paralysis
Sleep

If snorted by wizards, this fine powder gives them +2 to all spellcasting
attempts for the next hour. The wizard must make a DR 2 Test after the
first hour. On a roll of natural 1 they become addicted. The DR increases
by 1 every time the Wizards sniffs moonsnow. See DRUGS.
Coat a weapon. Save DR 10 or take d6 damage.
All persons in Zone must Test DR 10 or vomit uncontrollably for 1
round.
All in Zone must Test CON DR 10 or be paralyzed for d4 rounds.
All in Zone must Test CON DR 10 or fall asleep for d4 rounds.

ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d6+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).

ROGUES
Rogues are the most versatile profession. Rogues include anyone who makes their living by
less than reputable means. They include outlaws, thieves, beggars, pickpockets, smugglers,
and footpads—but also actors, bawds, gamblers, minstrels, and poets.
THIEF OR SCOUNDREL?
Choose a criminal path:
Thieves make a living by stealing. Begin with +1 DEX.
Scoundrels make a living from their wits and charm. Begin with +1 CHA.
PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 DEX or +1 CHA
Weapons & Armor Permitted: all hand weapons, all ranged weapons, light armor, shield
Attack Damage: d6 (armed) or d3 (unarmed)
Roll or choose:
D12 BACKGROUND
1
Agitator

2

Beggar

3

Courtesan

4

Bone Picker

Graduated University with no employable skills. From
street corners and coffeeshops, you rage against the upper
class.
You never knew your father and our mother hanged
herself after drowning your siblings.
You know the secrets they keep when they’re talking in
their sleep.
You scavenged from the dead and dying on battlefields.

5

Performer

6
7
8

Pickpocket
Outlaw/Pirate
Poet

9

Rat-catcher

10
11

Resurrectionist
Servant

12

Vagabond

Bad luck such as plague or a poorly timed joke ended your
once-promising career. Choose from jester, minstrel,
mime, or puppeteer.
Raised in the streets by a gang of thieves.
Strangled your jailer and escaped the noose.
Fleeing a scandal, you travel the world seeking inspiration
for your future masterpiece.
Someone’s gotta do it. You have an old, blind dog with a
keen sense of smell.
Because “body snatcher” sounds so undignified.
Tired of your job as scullery maid, execution cleaner,
tavern wench, piss boy, or other menial job.
You owe the sharks in your hometown d6x100 SD.

EQUIPMENT
Every Rogue starts with a hooded cloak and d6sd. Thieves get A. Scoundrels get B.
A. Leather jacket (+1 DEF), club, dagger, 1 disguise, lockpicks, an iron grappling hook
and rope, lucky rabbit’s foot or coin, d6gp.
B. Doublet (+1 DEF), rapier, dagger, snuff box, d6gp and appropriate tools (musical
instrument, tattered copy of a classic tragedy, playing cards, puppets, journal, etc).,
d6gp
EXPERTISE
Thief: climb, find/disarm traps, gambling, hiding/sneaking, listen, pick locks &
pockets
Scoundrel: act, dance, gambling, hiding/sneaking, play musical instrument, reading &
writing, persuasion, sing,
SPECIAL ABILITIES
Choose either A or B:
A. Sneak Attack: do an extra damage die when you attack from behind.
B. Luck: re-roll any failed die roll, once per day.
ADVANCEMENT
When you gain a Level:
Test against each Ability Score. If you roll higher than the current number, raise that
Ability Score by 1.
Gain d6+CON bonus HP until you reach max (CON Ability Score).

WIZARD

Wizards are scholars who have learned to cast spells. Magic is dangerous, unpredictable, and
illegal—forcing Wizards to operate in secret. Children who demonstrate magical abilities are
either burned or snatched up by mages to serve an apprenticeship in the forbidden arts.
Wizards are hated and feared by the general populace and hunted by authorities, who will
often burn them on sight. This is made easier by the fact that wizards must tattoo their spells
on their bodies. Consequently, Wizards often live in isolated locations and seldom leave
home. Young Wizards are apprenticed to a master Wizard by age ten and serve at least a
decade of indentured servitude. In exchange for frequently brutal and abusive treatment, the
master instructs the apprentice in the ways of magic, judiciously parceling out one spell at a
time. Master Wizards continue to serve as patrons to their fledgling apprentices.
PROFILE
Ability Score Bonus: +1 INT to start
Maximum Hit Points: 15
Weapons & Armor Permitted: dagger, staff, crossbow, clothing only
Attack Damage: d6 (armed) or d4 (unarmed) or by spell
Roll or choose:
D6 BACKGROUND
1
Abandoned at birth
2

Banished freak

3

Spell-born fetus

4
5

Accused witch
Suffering servant

6

Ex-Librarian

Born with an extra nipple you were left to die of exposure
by the side of the road.
When you were a teenager your sorcerous powers started
to manifest. Your parents gave you some silver and told you
to leave, lest your whole family be burned.
Grown by a wizard in an artificial womb in case they need
an extra kidney.
Rescued at the last moment from the pyre.
You have served as the indentured servant of a wizard
since childhood.
You found a forbidden tome in your university library.

EQUIPMENT
Every Wizard starts with a hooded cloak, a pot of squid ink and tattoo needles, and a skull
ring. Choose A or B:
A. Form-fitting clothing, 1 small pouch of weirdweed, clay pipe or cigarette holder,
glow-in-the-dark nail polish, and 2d6gp.
B. Loose robes, spectacles, snuff box, leather-bound journal, a human skull, and
2d6gp.

EXPERTISE
Read/write common, read/write ancient languages, read/write arcane languages, general and
historical knowledge
SPECIAL ABILTIES
Cast Minor Spells (Level 1) [D&D Levels 0-2]
Cast Major Spells (starting at Level 4) [D&D Levels 3-4]
ACQUIRING SPELLS
Wizards do not choose their spells. Instead, they must acquire them in one of the following
ways:
Reward. A master Wizard may grant spells as a reward for a special service, such as
completing a quest.
Gain a Level. When a Wizard gains a Level, their master will give them one new
spell.
Exploration. Copying a spell from a scroll, grimoire, or off a dead wizard’s skin.
Indeed, a fresh wizard’s corpse is a treasure unto itself.
The first spell a Master Wizard will teach is always Extinguish Fires (during the middle ages
and renaissance, fire killed nearly as many people as war and plague). The second spell is
always Cantrip, which allows them to mop floors, clean dishes, shine boots, and other
mundane tasks.
Thereafter, the most common spells are Light, Shield, and Magic Missile—but it’s up the
fickle whims of the master.
Each new spell must be tattooed on the wizard’s body in a place that is easily accessible such
as the arms and legs. In this manner, each Wizard becomes a unique, living grimoire. It also
makes higher Level Wizards more conspicuous and easier targets for witch hunters.
CASTING SPELLS
There is no limit to the number of spells a Wizard can know or cast in a day. BUT they must
roll a d20 to cast. The DR is either 10 or a Target’s DEF. This is where it gets fun:
On a natural 20, the spell’s effects are doubled.
On a natural 1, the caster loses a Mind Point and must roll again on the Critical Spell
Failure Chart. Watch out! This may result in a spell backfiring, hitting the wrong
target, a mutation, or worse.

Old Wizard proverb, “The wizard with the longest beard casts the fewest spells.”
ADVANCEMENT





COMBAT
THE COMBAT ROUND

Combat is broken into 3-6 second rounds. The order is as follows:
1. Declare all actions, including attacks, spells, and retreats.
2. Roll d6 for initiative. Loaded ranged weapons always go first.
4. The winning side acts.
• Movement
• Missiles
• Spellcasting
• Melee Weapons
5. The losing side acts.

Declare Actions
At the start of the round, all players must declare what their character is doing. The GM must declare
what the opponents are doing. Once an action is declared, it cannot be changed. Actions include:
Move and Take Action: move a short distance and attack, draw a weapon, etc.
Stay Put and Take Action: switch weapons, untie a prisoner, drink a potion, etc.
Move two zones.
Retreat.

Distance & Movement
Distance is expressed in three abstract zones: melee, ranged, and out of range.
In one round a character can move one zone and attack or move two zones. If a character is in the
melee zone, they may move anywhere else in the melee zone.
Melee zone is where the main fight occurs. It represents the light source such as a torch or lantern.
Ranged zone is the furthest zone from which ranged weapons may attack.
Out of Range means the characters can hear the combat but cannot see it and cannot interfere.

Ranged Weapons

Ranged weapons include thrown weapons such as spears and knives, projectiles such as bows, and
mechanical weapons such as crossbows or firearms. Ranged attacks are possible when opponents are
5’ or more feet away, but mechanical weapons can be fired at point blank range.
Loaded ranged weapons attack before anyone can move. If a ranged weapon is not loaded at the start
of the combat round, the player must take the time to load it. See weapon descriptions for loading
times.
Ranges
Point blank range: +2 to attack roll
Short: +1 to attack roll
Medium: no bonus or penalty
Long: -1 to hit
Out of range: the target cannot be hit
Cover
Partial: -1 to -4 penalty
Full: the target cannot be hit
Friendly Fire
If an ally is close to a target and the attacker rolls natural 1, they hit the ally instead, inflicting regular
damage. The GM should always inform the attacker this is a possibility before the dice are rolled.

Spellcasting
Concentration: spellcasting requires intense effort and complete concentration. If a caster loses
initiative and takes damage, the spell fails.
Freedom: the caster needs to be able to speak and move their hands. A tied, handcuffed, or gagged
spellcaster cannot cast spells.
Movement: a spellcaster make take a couple of steps and still cast a spell, but they cannot move to a
different zone and cast.
Line of site: the caster needs to be able to see their target.
Drugs: certain drugs can enhance spellcasting performance and give a wizard a bonus to cast. See
drugs .
Critical Spell Failure
Magic is dangerous. If a caster rolls a natural 1 while casting a spell, it results in a critical spell failure.
The caster rolls the d20 again and consults the critical spell failure chart. The more powerful the
spell, the worse the potential effects.

Attacks
Critical Hits!
Natural 20 always hits and the attacker does d12 bonus damage. This
Critical Miss!
Natural 1 always misses and results in a complication. Roll a d6.
1-2 PC nearly drops their weapon but recovers it. Firearms misfire.
3-4 Weapon flies d10 feet in a random direction. Bowstrings break.
5-6 Weapon is broken or lost. Bowstrings break. Firearms explode.

Move and Attack
PCs may move one zone and attack once in the same round.

Multiple Attacks
PCs with multiple attacks may forgo moving and elect to make two attacks instead.
Rolling for Damage
Damage:

Attacks Rolls
1. Roll d20
2. Apply modifiers: STR for Melee. DEX for Ranged. Expertise die if applicable. Circumstances (cover,
attacking from behind, etc.)
3. Resolve. If you hit, roll damage.

KEEP IT MOVING
Ever notice most RPGs slow down when the action starts? Screw that.
Memorize these words: Never stop to look up rules. Ever.
No set of rules can completely cover every situation. Trust your instincts and go with the
flow. Assign a DR. Determine if someone has Advantage or Disadvantage. Move on.
Real combat is fast and real soldiers have to make split-second decisions. Don’t allow players
to take too long to decide what they want to do. Say, “What does Malleus want to do? You
have five seconds. Five…four….three…”.

Have the players declare their actions at the start of the round, then all roll their dice at the
same time. Then look at the results and narrate what happened.
MAKE IT CINEMATIC
Use natural language, not technical jargon. Describe the results of every die roll. Do not say,
“The goblin missed.” Instead say, “Splinters fly and your arm goes numb as the goblin batters
at your shield!” Do not say, “You kill the bandit.” Instead say, “Your blow slices through the

bandit’s carotid artery, spraying you with blood and dropping him to the ground in a
gurgling heap.”
Encourage PCs to use the environment to their advantage. Let them leap down on
opponent’s from above. Let them bank spells off reflective surfaces. Let them strangle the evil
cultist with his own prayer beads.
Rule of thumb: if it’s cool, allow players to attempt it.
ROLL OUT IN THE OPEN
Nothing is more terrifying when a GM makes their combat rolls in public. No hiding. No
fudging. No pulling punches. If a natural 20 comes up and a character is killed on the first
shot—well, that’s life. It happens. Even to heroes.
When players know the GM doesn’t pull punches, they are more cautious about entering
combat in the first place. They are reluctant to start fights and threaten random NPCs. They
tend not to draw their swords unless they have no other choice. They start thinking about
using the environment to give them the advantage and will seek to take the enemy by
surprise. In other words—things real soldiers actually do.
Even if no characters die, your game will feel more dangerous, because the players know
their favorite character is one natural 20 away from a dirt nap.
So roll out in the open and let your players know combat is potentially fatal.
USE TIMER DICE
The moment someone throws the first punch, the GM tosses a d4 in public. The resulting
number is the number of rounds before something terrible happens, like:
• reinforcements arrive
• a torch goes out
• the ceiling collapses
• the ice cracks and the PCs fall through
• the enemy slits the prisoner’s throat
• the monster regenerates to full HP

The GM can let players know the stakes—or just give an evil laugh and say the consequences
will be serious. This is one of the best ways to build tension and make a combat about more
than which side has the most hit points.
OPTIONAL RULE: GIVE ENCOUNTERS THE SAME DC
Condense all the factors—the monsters DEF, visibility, weather conditions, terrain, etc. into
one, single number. Take the largest d20 you can find, plop it near the center of the table
with the DR on top, and say, “The room DC is ___.”
That number is the DR for everything in the room: the number you need to hit the ogre, cast
a spell, hide in shadows, pick the lock on the chest—everything. No more players asking,
“Wait—what do I need to roll again?” They will all know from the start.
Adjust the DR to the circumstances. Is the ogre wounded? Lower it to 11. Did one of the
characters’ torches get extinguished in the scrum? Raise it by to 15.
Did goblin reinforcements arrive? Emboldened by the presence of the mighty ogre, they
swarm the PCs and their DR is equal to the rest of the room as long as the ogre lives. If the
ogre is slain, the DR drops a few points. Simple.
Is this realistic? Maybe not. But fast and simple trumps realism. And here’s the thing—one or
two points on a d20 do not make an appreciable difference—especially when luck dice are
involved.
This rule is it doesn’t make much sense if the big boss is surrounded by tiny minions. In that
case, you can always make an exception. Remember—the GM trumps all rules.
This one rule will speed play considerably, however.
TIME
Combat time is measured in 3-6 second Rounds. During a round, PC and NPCs take Actions.
ZONES
DEATHBRINGER uses abstract Zones to represent distance. Combat space is divided into
three Zones: Melee, Ranged, and Out Of Range. It is designed to be compatible with
Ultimate Dungeon Terrain (UDT) and miniatures, although these are not necessary.

Melee Zone is the spotlight—the center ring where most of the action takes place. Anything
in the Melee Zone can move and attack anything else in Melee Zone. If the PCs are in a
small to medium-sized room, everyone is in Melee Zone.
Ranged Zone means within arrow-shooting or spear-throwing distance. Ranged weapons can
target opponents in the Melee Zone.
Out of Range means you can hear the combat—you know it is happening—but cannot
interfere with it. Likewise, you are safe from attacks.
THE SPOTLIGHT
In most games that employ terrain, the GM usually lays down dungeon tiles and move the
PC miniatures through them. Not DEATHBRINGER.
DEATHBRINGER takes the opposite approach. Place the miniatures representing the PCs in
the center Zone. As the PCs explore their surroundings, place the most prominent terrain
features—doorways pillars, stairs, walls, etc.—around them. Imagine the center ring
represents the extent of the PCs’ light source. Beyond is darkness and the fog of war. In this
manner, you can play more dungeon in less space.
One exception is if the PCs attempt to stalk a monster from a distance or sneak up on an
enemy camp. Then you might place the monster in the center and the PCs in the Ranged
Zone. But if the PCs say, “we enter the room,” place them in the center Zone.
MOVING AND ACTIONS
There are three basics types of moves:
Move and Take Action
Move a short distance within a Zone and do something else: attack, cast a spell, draw a
weapon, switch weapons, place your lantern on the floor, load your crossbow, etc.

Stay Put and Take Action
Concentrate on doing one thing. Aim and shoot. Drink a Potion of Healing. Free the
prisoner. Disarm the trap. Stanch a fallen comrade’s wounds. If you have two attacks, now is
the time to do that.
Move Two Zones
Run full speed toward the center Zone to help your friends—or get the hell away from that
monster!

Ex: Natasha, The Bastard D’Uvel, and Britt enter the ogre’s chamber. D’Uvel—having already
drawn his sword—moves and attacks. Natasha takes partial cover behind a pillar and casts a
spell. Britt hides in the shadows and draws her dagger, hoping to sneak up on the ogre from
behind
ORDER OF COMBAT
1. Determine if one side is surprised.
2. Declare Actions.
3. Determine Initiative.
4. Resolve Actions.
SURPRISING OPPONENTS
Did the PCs sneak up on a monster? Did a monster sneak up on them? The GM decides when
and if one side is surprised. Surprising an enemy means the attacker gets a free attack.
DECLARING ACTIONS
In the heat of a six-second combat Round, a million things are happening at once. Fighters
are striking and defending. Magic users are trying to remember the words to their spells.
Archers are nocking their arrows, pulling back their bowstrings, locating a target, and firing.
Monsters are trying to rip their faces off. Characters wouldn’t have time to discuss optimal
strategies or change their minds in mid-action. That’s why all players must their Actions
before the Initiative is rolled.
Play proceeds clockwise from the GM. Each player in turn says what they want their
character to do. Players may wish to seat themselves in the order of their characters’ DEX
scores, from highest to lowest. Or they may opt to arrange themselves for optimal strategy.
It’s their call. Then the dice are all rolled at once and the GM narrates what happened.
INITIATIVE: WHO GOES FIRST?
Most games have one method for determining who goes first. Not DEATHBRINGER. The
GM can choose from three options:

Traditional Group Initiative
Both sides toss a d6 each round. Highest roll wins. Ties mean everyone goes simultaneously.
This method means the tide of combat can change suddenly as one side gets back-to-back
attacks. It also encourages the players to think of themselves as a team. When they win
initiative, players cheer and give each other high-fives. That doesn’t happen with other
methods.
DEX Order
Characters and monsters attack from highest DEX to lowest. This method is orderly and easy
for the GM to remember, especially if the players sit in DEX order around the table.
Simultaneous
Both the characters and monsters go at once. The dice tell the story: if the player rolls a 16
and the GM a 4—it is assumed the PC was faster than the monster. This method resembles
the clusterfudge of a real combat. It also will make players very cautious before starting a
fight.
RESOLVING ACTIONS
Simple actions such as moving into position or drawing a sword do not require a roll. A roll is
only required for actions that have a reasonable chance of failure. Hitting an opponent
requires testing against their DEF. See Killing Stuff.
The GM should do their best to narrate the results of the dice. The dice are more than a
result. They tell the story: “D’Uvel slices the ogre’s meaty arm for eight damage. With a roar,

it backhands him and sends him sprawling against the pillar for nine points damage. Natasha
struggles to remember her spell but the sound of D’uvel’s crunching bones distracts her and
the spell fizzles. Then suddenly, Britt emerges from the shadows, leaps on the ogre from
behind and buries her short sword in its back for 12 damage! It drops to its knees, causing the
ground to shake.”
Some players like to assist in the narration. Let them! Allowing them to describe finishing
moves is always fun.
KILLING STUFF
Rolling to hit does not represent a single blow. It represents a flurry of feints, slashes, parries,
blocks, and jabs. The roll indicates whether the PC was able to land an effective blow during
that exchange.
The DR in combat is based on the DEF of the opponent.

MELEE
RANGED
SPELLS

Test STR + EX vs. DEF
Test DEX + EX vs. DEF
Test INT + EX vs. DEF

CRITICAL HIT (natural 20)
Roll an addition d12 for damage.
CRITICAL FAILURE (natural 1)
Roll again. The higher the roll, the worse the result. Suggestions:
Your sword gets stuck in your opponent’s ribs and you can’t put it out.
The tip of your blade is sheared off. It’s -1 damage from now on.
Your bow string breaks and will take d4 minutes to repair.
You accidentally hit your friend or an innocent bystander.
Your pistol jams or explodes in your hand, taking d4 fingers with it.
Wizards and Clerics have their own spell miscast tables for when a Complication is rolled.
SPELLCASTING DURING COMBAT
The DR for spellcasting is the DEF of the Target.
If a spellcaster loses Initiative and takes damage, each point of damage is added to the
spellcasting DR. Ex: Natasha wants to cast a spell on a brigand. The brigand’s DEF is 12. The
brigand wins Initiative has hits Natasha for 5 points of damage. Natasha’s player must roll a
17 or better to cast her spell.
If a Wizard or Cleric rolls natural 1 when casting a spell, they must roll on the Critical Spell
Failure tables.
ADJUSTING DC IN COMBAT
Many RPGs assign specific bonuses and penalties to every possible circumstance that might
occur in combat. We believe this is not only impossible, but needlessly cumbersome and
slow. Flexible rules are always faster than hard rules. That’s why we don’t include specific
rules for flanking, partial cover, ½ cover, etc.
Most of these situations can be handled by the GM applying simple common sense and just
raising or lowering the DC or declaring Advantage/Disadvantage.
PCs may gain Advantage when they:
surprise an opponent
attack from behind
attack from above

surround an enemy
throw sand into an enemy’s eyes
PCs may incur Disadvantage when they are:
surprised
outnumbered 2-1
shooting at an enemy that has cover
fighting in deep mud, snow or an unstable or uneven surface
fighting in darkness
Consider: Advantage/Disadvantage raises an average DC (10-11) by an average of +5/-5. If a
player has Advantage, their chance of rolling a complication (double natural 1s) is 1 in 400.
Reserve Advantage for when the players have truly earned it through clever play.
STUNTS
And speaking of clever players, they will often want to do cool moves not covered by the
rules. Good! That’s what makes Tabletop RPGs fun.
Stunts include:
• swing from a chandelier
• slide down a tapestry
• slide down a staircase on their shield while shooting arrows at an enemy
• destroy the table on which an enemy is standing
• slide between the monster’s legs and stab him in his genitals
• throw mud into the eyes of an opponent
• jump onto a monster’s back and shut his helmet visor so he’s blinded
• lasso a flying dragon
When PCs attempt a Stunt, decide on an appropriate Test (typically DEX) and choose a DR.
Then ask the players if they still want to make the attempt.
• If they succeed, they get Advantage on their next roll
• If they fail, they get Disadvantage on their next roll
If players already have advantage for some reason, give them Triple Advantage and allow
them two roll three dice! You will never see a happier player.
RETREAT!
If a PC or monster does not have any obstacles blocking their way, they may disengage and
run away without provoking an attack of opportunity.

This allows PCs and major villains to escape to fight another day. Encourage players to use
this tactic when things get rough.
DAMAGE

When a target is wounded, they lose Hit Points. When they are reduced to 0 HP, they have
received a Critical Wound. When they are reduced to one HP or below, they are dead.
Hit Points are a combination of fighting skill, toughness, and luck. Losing hit points does not
necessarily mean the character is bleeding from a wound. They may have had the wind
knocked out them or be out of breath. On the other hand, a character with only one or two
hit points is probably bleeding profusely and in need of a few stitches. They may role-play an
injury, but the suffer no game penalties until they are reduced to 0HP.
Sleeping victims have one hit point, regardless of Level. Unaware opponents may have
reduced hit points if taken by complete surprise. A classic situation is sneaking up behind an
unsuspecting guard and knocking them unconscious with a single blow. If the GM decides
the guard is unaware of the PCs approach, the GM may opt to reduce the guard to d6hp or
less.
ZERO HIT POINTS
When reduced to exactly zero Hit Points, roll a d20, with no modifiers on the chart below.

Roll
20
16-19
15
14
13
12
11
6-10
1-5

Critical Injuries
K.O. Wake up after d4 rounds with 1hp. Lucky you.
Concussion. All tests at disadvantage until you rest for a day. Gain a scar.
Broken bone. Disadvantage on all STR, DEX, & CON tests until medical attention
is received. Recover time 4+ d4 weeks.
Lost eye. DEX permanently reduced by 1.
Disfigured. CHA permanently reduced by 2.
Lost limb. GM chooses. DEX permanently reduced by 2.
Massive headwound. Brain matter is exposed. INT permanently reduced by 2.
Hemorrhage. The victim is bleeding to death. Another character can staunch
their wounds by making an INT 15. Failure means the victim dies.
Dead.

NEGATIVE HIT POINTS
The character is mortally wounded. The players gets to make a dramatic death speech. Then
the character expires.

Determining Difficulty Ratings & HP for Enemies
Here’s are my simple guidelines for determining opponent target numbers.
Level
Minions
Skilled
Expert
Boss

DR
10
12
14
TN

HP
5 or less
10
15
20+

Dmg
1-6
1-8
1-8+ STR
1-10+ STR
Multiple attacks & special abilities

10
12
14
15+
It doesn’t matter whether the monsters are bandits, goblins, orc, or whatever. It doesn’t
matter if the boss is an ogre or vampire. I use the same stats with some slight variation and
try to give each boss a unique quality or ability like:
• when reduced to negative hp they will regenerate to half hit points and attack again
• all bladed weapons cause only 1hp damage
• regenerates at 5hp per round

SPELLCASTING & PRAYERS
Consecrated have access to their entire prayer list from the start.
Wizards gain spells by either having a master wizard teach them spells or by finding them in
the dungeons, libraries, crypts, etc.
Master Wizards are Level 7 or higher.
The DR for spells & prayers is set by the GM and is based on time and pressure. Casting light
or cure wounds in a safe location might be DR 2, because caster has time to concentrate.
Casting magic missile on an angry ogre would require rolling the creature’s DEF, because
that creature is it is terrifying and trying to kill the party.
A natural 20 while casting spells or prayers results in the effects being doubled.
A natural 1 results a critical spell/prayer failure.

Critical Spell Failures
If the spell Level is 1-2, toss a d10.
If the spell Level is 3+, toss a d20.
Any critical spell failure causes a Wizard to gain one Insanity Point.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

There is a popping sound. Then the caster’s nose gushes blood for d6 rounds.
All food and drink within the room spoil instantly.
The caster’s hair turns white or falls out.
The caster’s eyes turn violet or amber. The effect is permanent.
Ghostly laughter and a sudden gust of wind. Every light source in the room –
including magical ones—have a 50% chance of being extinguished.
The next baby born within a 10 mile radius is mutated and immediately eats its way
out of its mother’s womb, killing her. The caster knows this and loses a sanity point.
An opponent swells up and gains 10hp.
Caster goes temporarily insane and either runs away screaming or falls into a
catatonic state. Every round they must test TN 10 to recover their wits.
The room is plunged into magical darkness. For the next round, everyone attacks at 4.

10. Roll again, only this time toss a d20.
11. Oops. Friendly fire. Caster hits an ally or innocent for full damage
12. Shockwave: everyone in the room must save DR15 or be knocked prone.
13. All armor—even magical—within 50’ disintegrates. All magical weapons become
normal.
14. Body switch. All player swap character sheets with the player to the left for the
remainder of this encounter.
15. All deceased creatures within the zone are reanimated as zombies and immediately
attack.
16. Mutation. Roll on the list below.
17. Spell backfire. If the spell is offensive everyone in the zone, including the caster, takes
the spell’s damage.
18. Caster accidentally summons a hostile monster from another dimension.
19. Caster appears to disintegrate. Actually, they disappear into another dimension for
d10 months.
20. Caster explodes. Everyone in the zone is splattered with gore and takes spell damage.
The caster’s grinning skeleton stands for a moment, then collapses. Everyone loses a
sanity point.
Mutations (d10)
Roll a random result. If perchance the wizard should roll the exact same result a second time,
the mutation disappears.
1. The character’s skin stops aging. Lucky you.
2. The caster’s eyes become sensitive to sunlight but see 20% better in reduced darkness.
3. A huge boil erupts on the caster’s cheek and swells for d4+1 days. Then it bursts and a
hairy black spider leaps out, scuttles through a knot in the floorboard and
disappears—for now.
4. Caster ages d20 years instantly.
5. Nothing seems to happen. That night, an exact duplicate twin of the spellcaster grows
from the nearest plant and will immediately attempt to murder the spellcaster and
take their place.
6. Extra mouth filled with needle-like teeth grows in an inconspicuous place.
7. A new eye appears in a random location: (1-3) hands (4-5) chest/back (6) forehead.
8. A tiny second head grows on the caster’s shoulder. It giggles and sings children’s
songs at inappropriate times.
9. A second face emerges out the caster’s back.
10. Reptilian skin and a hunger for live mice.
11. An eyestalk erupts from the center of the forehead. The caster now craves human
flesh.
12. You mutate over d6 months into a giant worm or roach, although you retain the
power of speech. The effects are permanent.

Cleric Critical Spell Failures
Toss a d10.
1. You are unworthy. Your god ignores your request and all requests for d4-1 rounds.
2. Thou shalt not take the Lord’s name in vain. Your god has decided your cause is not
worth their time. You may not cast prayers for the remainder of this encounter.
3. Ye of little faith! You have a moment of doubt. -1 to all pray tests for the rest of the
day.
4. Sacrifice of blood. The god will grant your request IF you agree to lose d6 hit points.
5. Stigmata. Wounds open up in your palms. -1 to hit for the rest of the day.
6. You keep the company of sinners. Your god refuses to help anyone in the party of
non-good alignment (or +1 ethos or better) for the rest of the session.
7. Visions of hell. You are catatonic for d4 rounds and lose a sanity point.
8. Why have you abandoned me? Disadvantage to all pray tests of the rest of the day.
9. Do not put your god to the test. Your body is covered in painful, weeping sores. You
may not cast prayers for the rest of the day. The sores disappear in d6 days.
10. Impure thoughts. You may not cast prayers until you fast and flog yourself for 3 days.

HEALING & RECOVERY
•
•

PCs gain 1 hp per day of complete rest
PCs gain an additional 1 hp if they have medical attention from a physician.

UNDER CONSTRUCTION
Reducing Insanity Points
PC can reduce their insanity by de-stressing.
The Devout spend time praying in cloisters.
Fighters, Bounty Hunters, Duelists, and Rogues drink, gamble, and visit dens of iniquity.
Wizards and Plague Doctors take mind-altering drugs.
De-stressing costs d6x10gp. After a night of de-stressing, the PC must make a test at TN 11. If
they succeed, the lose one IP. If they fail, they may try again the next night.
Developing Disorders

Starting at +3 IP, a character must test TN 10 or develop a disorder. The GM chooses the
disorder based on their judgement and the circumstances. Disorders include but are not
limited to:
Addiction
Claustrophobia
Heroic Stupidity
Nyctophobia
Paranoia

Phobia

You need drugs or alcohol on a daily basis to function normally.
Costs d6gp per day. If you skip a day you suffer -d6 to all attempts.
Fear of enclosed spaces. -6 to all attempts while underground
You will NEVER retreat, despite hopeless odds.
Fear of the dark. -6 to attempts while underground or at night
Fear that everyone—including your friends—are out to get you. You
refuse you go first in any situation, believing they will stab you in the
back. You not lend money to anyone, believing they will steal from
you.
You have an irrational fear of spiders, snakes, skulls, fire—whatever
caused you to gain IP.

If a PC passes the test they continue to gain IP.

Recovery from Disorders
To recover from a disorder, the character must seek either retire to an abbey or see a
physician
Abbey: vestals lock you away for d6 weeks. Test at DR 10 to be cured and lose d4 IP.
Otherwise spend d6 more weeks and try again. Cost is d4x100gp in donations to the abbey.
Physician: the surgeon opens up your skull and attempts to cauterize the troublesome part of
your brain with a hot iron. Roll on this chart:
Brain Surgery Chart
D20 Roll
11-20
3-10
2
1
Arms & Equipment
Armor

Effect
Cured! Lose d6 IP.
No effect
Suffer -1 INT permanently
You are lobotomized

Type

Category

Shield
Doublet
Gambeson
Brigandine
Mail

Light
Light
Light
Medium
Heavy

Melee Weapons*
Type
Battle Ax
Dagger
Mace
Spear
Sword
Two-handed sword or ax
Missile Weapons*
Type
Blunderbuss
Bow
Crossbow
Flintlock pistol
Throwing knife
Mini crossbow
Sling & stones
Spear
Throwing Axe

DEF
Bonus
+1
+1
+2
+3
+4

Cost
10gp
20gp
50gp
100gp
400gp

Damage
d8
d4
d8
d6 (can also be ranged)
d8 Ignores all armor.
D10

Damage
d10 Ignores all armor
d8
d8
d8 Ignores all armor.
d4
d6
d6
d6
d6

Cost
10gp
5gp
10gp
3gp
15gp
20gp

Range
Here, There -d6 to hit
There
Here, There
Here, There
Here, There -d6 to hit
Here, There
There
Here, There
There

Cost
500gp
25gp
50gp
500gp
1gp
100gp
2gp
3gp

SPELLCASTING
Spells are not tools that work the same way every time they are taken it out of a toolbox.
Spells are the stuff of raw chaos—the primordial stuff of the universe. Spellcasters seek
to summon this power and force it to do their bidding. This chaos does not want to be
tamed, which is why wizards roll to cast.
Spells are composed in the secret, forbidden language of magic. Spells are recorded on
a wizard’s skin in the form of tattoos. A spell resembles a psalm, written in runes only
the wizard knows know how to pronounce. When a wizard says these words properly,
the spell’s effects are triggered. If the wizard’s player hits the DR, the spell goes off as
intended. If the player fails the roll the wizard misspeaks the words and the spell fails. If

a natural 1 is rolled, a catastrophic failure occurs and the wizard rolls on the Critical
Spell Failure chart.
Wizards may only cast the spells they know. Casting spells require secret phrases,
hand motions, and sometimes the use of components. A wizard cannot cast spells if
their hands are bound or they are gagged. Casting any spell takes just a few seconds.
Wizards may move and cast a spell in the same round.
Spells may also be recorded in grimoires or on scrolls. Wizards painstakingly transcribe
spells so this forbidden knowledge can be preserved. Scrolls may be written in slightly
different dialects, requiring the wizard to translate it first. To a wizard, a grimoire or scroll
is a treasure beyond price.
Spells are divided into three categories: petty, lesser, and greater.
Petty Spells are used to accomplish mundane tasks, like housework.
Lesser Spells are used for protection and to attack in proportion to common weapons.
Greater Spells are used to impact multiple opponents and inflict massive damage.
Casting spells is physically demanding. Lesser Spells cost 1hp to cast. Greater Spells
cost 2 HP to cast. If a wizard is reduced to 0hp as a result of casting spells, they are
dead. No saves. No qualifiers. Dead.
LEARNING SPELLS
Unlike in other game systems, players do not get to choose their spells in
DEATHBRINGER. Nor do they get to read the spell descriptions. Instead, patrons grant
spells and describe their effects, including range and potential hazards.
Example: “Acidic Arrow. Greater spell. Affects a single target up to about twenty paces
away. Good for damaging armor. Be very cautious when using it. I had another
apprentice who tried to cast this spell and it backfired. What a shame. Such a pretty
girl—ended up wearing an iron mask for the rest of her life.”

Patrons can grant their apprentices as many spells as they know but typically do it as a
reward for accomplishing tasks or rising in rank. The granting of any spell is
accompanied with a stern warning never to cast spells in public or use them to injure
innocent civilians, lest they attract the attention of witch-hunters.
Wizards can learn any spell from a grimoire or scroll by making a DR 10 INT test for
each spell. If they fail, they may try again after another week of study.
Wizards can also teach spells to one another, although some patrons forbid this.
APPRENTICESHIP

Wizards are apprenticed at a young age—usually around eight to ten years old—to a
patron who teaches them the dark arts. Apprentices serve for a period of not less than
ten years. During this period of indentured servitude, the patron teaches the apprentice
how to read magical languages and cast petty spells. When a wizard rises in rank, their
patron will may give them at least one new spell—sometimes more—at their discretion.
Wizards may also learn spells by finding scrolls (written spells) or by copying them from
the skin of other wizards—often dead ones.
The life of an apprentice is one of intense study and frequent abuse. Apprentices can
expect to cook, clean, shine shoes, wash windows, search for spell components, and
endure dangerous quests. Lodging conditions may be miserable, typically consisting of
a small cell or the corner or a stable. It is not unusual for patrons to beat their
apprentices and a few overly abusive patrons have been poisoned or strangled by
apprentices who have been pushed too far. Some cautious patrons ensure obedience
by fastening explosive collars around their apprentices’ necks.
Apprenticeship typically ends at Rank 3. However, if the wizard wishes to continue
serving their patron, they may. Often this is the only way to acquire new spells.
PATRONS
Patrons are wizards of rank 5 or higher. A patron will typically train only one apprentice
at a time, but higher rank patrons may have more. Patrons are highly selective about
who they accept as apprentices. No one seeks out a patron—the patron finds them,
typically by the age of twelve.
A few are kind. Most are cruel and subject their apprentices to all sorts of abuse,
treating them as virtual slaves during their apprenticeship. Whining, complaining, and
sarcasm are not tolerated.
Patrons are gatekeepers. Their job is to make certain the secrets of the dark arts are
passed on to the next generation. Patrons give out spells judiciously, only after the
apprentice proves they are responsible enough to wield power.
The GM should think carefully when creating the player’s patron. They are a major NPC
who can steer the course of a campaign. Sample patrons:
Delbert Gherin: a handsome man with kind blue eyes, black, shoulder length
hair, and a neatly trimmed salt-and-pepper beard. Lives in a townhouse in a city.
Gherin (no one refers to him by his first name or even seems to know it) is kind
and patient—a rarity for a patron. He views adventuring as a waste of time and
warns his apprentices against “associating with scoundrels”—his words for any
adventuring group.
Severine Malveaux: beautiful, elegant, and cruel. Lives in a tower in an isolated
outpost. She gives her apprentices humiliating nicknames like “Worm,” “Grub,”
and “Hopeless.” She has an extensive collection of boots which her apprentices

must constantly polish and re-arrange. She is bitter because her true love was
burned by Inquisitors and is distrustful of organized religions.
Lonchane: lives in a sewer lair deep beneath the streets of a major city. His face
is hideously disfigured and he hides it behind a collection of masks. Can be kind
but prone to fits of rage. Needs apprentices to run errands and fetch components
from the upper world. Sings opera incessantly.
WIZARD ORGANIZATION & CULTURE
Once wizards were numerous and advised kings.
Some Wizards are organized into secret, regional guilds. Guild members will have their
own secret signs and rings so they may identify one another. Each guild operates as a
cell, with lower-ranked members not knowing the identity of the higher-ranked
members. This ensures the wizards cannot reveal names in the event they are
captured.
Wizards are actively hunted by Inquisitors and Witch Hunters, who see them as a threat
to their faith.
and Bounty Hunters who seek to acquire their skins in order to sell their spells. When
travelling
In the world of DEATHBRINGER, wizards are hunted and feared. Wizards do not
practice their dark arts openly, lest they be burned by inquisitors. If an apprentice
Wizard behaves irresponsibly by murdering townsfolk, threatening people, or setting
fires, it is the responsibility of the patron to kill their apprentice.

